---
slug: chatgpt-for-zombie-claims
title: Chat GPT for zombie claims
authors: [denny]
tags: [proposals, ai, ml, zombie-claims]
---

I was thinking about it and Abhilash mentioned somethign like this on the call, so I decided to document this for feedback.

## Instantly Generate a fact check for zombie claims

1. Why

   This proposal aims to reduce the repetitive effort required to refute zombie claims by automating the process of generating a fact check article or tipline response. This is being proposed in response

2. Who

   Imagined users for now are fact checkers themselves. Anytime they receive a new post in a tipline or they see an image going viral, they can quickly query it against the zombie claim system and get a response back. They can configure the system to reply back a quick reply, a short fact check article or any other appropriate template. The needs that i foresee will be:

   - Buy in from some fact checkers to test out this system
   - The system should allow them to add new zombie claims
   - The system should integrate well with their existing workflows and software 3. How

3. How

   The process will involve working closely with factcheckers and look at the kind of data they have (media item, associated factcheck articles) and see what kind of content can be generated by LLMs. We'll see if it meets their standards in terms of the output quality and also translation quality.

4. Current difficulties

   - We would like to identify atleast 10 zombie claim examples to get started. Hopefully some fact checkers can help me identify these to start prototyping the system.
   - I am also not sure if the system can output responses satisfactorily in all languages of interest.
   - Since early on this program would not be integrated with the softwares used by the fact checkers, we'll need someone to put up with the inconvinience of that and still continue using our software and give us feedback.

5. Collaborators

   Some fact checkers who we can work closely with who don’t mind testing and improving an early version

6. Timeline

   3 month for a end to end prototype. Deploying in production might involve more institutional buy in which I have no way of estimating as of now.

7. Appropriate Working Groups

   - Zombie Claims
   - Increase Reach of factchecks

While the instantaneous redressal of zombie claims is the immediate goal, a larger goal would also be to explore the use of LLMs like chatgpt for scaling up factchecks in various Indian Languages.
